---
title: Exploring the Psalms (Part 1): Presage as Thematic Continuity and Conterpoint
description: Mining the traces of a fulfilled hope, in cries of vindication and dereliction
author: E. A. Ramos
date: "2025-11-26"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog
  - essay
  - christianity
  - religion
  - reading
  - book
  - psalms
  - bible
draft: true
---

Take the ideas from DBH's appendix on the Resurrection (noting the disagreeable, quasi-gnostic undertones), and from C.S. Lewis' thoughts on death, foreknowledge, the character of revelation- as evidently absent- in the Psalms. I see this differently from Lewis' outdated, naively historicized, and problematically ethnic understanding of the understanding of "the Jews" vs the "Christian" understanding (I'd posit an extra layer of "Israelite", if altogether a valid set of categories in the first place). I affirm the observation of an absence of expectation for eternal life, much moreso of a theologically realized dualistic afterlife. There is in my estimation, however, a natural sense of progression, in which the early Church saw a clear path to Christ. How the person of Christ is, in so many ways, at once but the fulfillment of longing and the panegyric of woes in the Psalms, in a character only proper to Him being naturally _brought forward_, _incarnate_, _revealed_, characterizing the New Testament, His (and only His) kerygma, itself. Continuity and counterpoint, all point to Him. 

I think that in this absence a progression is intimated is my thesis. That in the longing a fulfillment is expected, is well, expected. I want to push against Lewis' "this and that" framing, while still acknowledging the historical realities of sheol, the psalms as deeply entrenched in wartime imagery; with all the imprecation, and crassly physical descriptions of victory entailed. But, as with all Scripture, is it sublimated, completed, by Christ; His overseeing of the Eschaton and victory over death

Here DBH's observation of the dual conceptions of resurrection in the Christian tradition is very poignant, since it intimates the connection between these two ideas, inextricably interlinked. He obviously has his preference, but as with many articles of faith, taking a "both-and" approach with an open mind for existential grappling with mystery, seems to me the most illuminating (paradoxically enough). This naturally leads to Lewis' observations on the "Jewish" and the "Christian" understandings of judgement, and my own take on a Christian reading of these hopes for judgement, and their haughty character, in light of the Eschaton and our participation in Christ. 


May the Holy Spirit lead us to into the fullness of Truth, Amen. <span>**ยง**</span>