---
title: Thoughts on David Bentley Hart's The Light of Tabor (Part 1)
description: The first in a series of chapter by chapter commentary
author: E. A. Ramos
date: 2025-10-31
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog
  - christianity
  - religion
  - reading
  - book
  - commentary
draft: false
image: the_light_of_tabor.jpg
---
I think it's interesting, as I read chapter 1 of David Bentley Hart’s _The Light of Tabor: Toward a Monistic Christology_, to get a grasp on why I'm more drawn to a dualistic Divine/created ontology, probably due to my own experience with God. To be on "this side", surely of unbelief, but beyond that, a profound ignorance of the religious drive, and the power of motifs productive to the latter. The leap of faith was not just unbelief to belief, but the intuited (perhaps revealed) apprehension of the _here_ and the _there_, the sublime and the mundane, the sacred and the profane, the Divine and the created, and all the cosmic enormity entailed thereafter. The perception of God as _God,_ the “not-this” and the “not-that”, but unmistakably the Good, this being properly called _the state of faith_. The inherent duality in the conversion experience, and the revelatory unveiling of analogous dyadic contrasts, are self-similar. 

But further beyond, the beauty of the Incarnation with respect to this newly internalized duality, is a harmony so graciously, so mercifully manifest in the Person(a) of Christ, in all the motifs and epithets embodied by Him by virtue of either full Divinity and full humanity: that the identity of Christ be a microcosm of absolute totality, "**Christ is all and in all"** (Colossians 3:11). This coming to faith in the Gospel does not only evince the great, all-encompassing rift between the One and man, a despairing proposition in itself (James 2:19), but at once the apex instantiation of reconciliation in the God-man Christ Jesus: that faith be commensurate with the means requisite of salvific efficacy in Christ, as that leap is no lesser miracle than God become man, than man be made divine. The acquisition of faith and salvation are mythopoetically isomorphic, and hence fittingly, interweaved as gradations of the same motif. These follow a clear phenomenological hierarchy of belief, understanding, then union, the enrapture of the subject within the fullness of this revelation being proof in itself of its sublimity, its comprehensive, totalizing, self-sufficient Truth of having seen Truth.

That being said, I have also felt disgruntled by how unsatisfactory this answer was over time, outside bouts of euphoric qualia, if only because of how little credence it gives to ancient, well-trodden understandings of God's immanence, God's "here-ness", which as Hart writes, is irrevocably transformed by the Nicene implications of an essential line between God and creature:

> Neither the difference between _creatio ex nihilo_ and mere demiurgy nor the difference between divine begetting and divine making could any longer remain comfortably uncertain; much less could those two differences remain inextricably entangled with one another. In every sense, the interval between the "there above" and the "here below", which had for so long been a spacious realm of inexact and relative degrees of the divine and natural, now had to contract into an inviolable line of demarcation.[^1]


This new scheme did gift us the understanding of God as the _interior intimo_, being so anterior to creation as to inhabit it all in equal measure[^2]. But, this in turn required innovations like the energies of Neo-Palamism to account for intermediary roles previously occupied by the angelomorphic _deuteros theos_ (at other times, the _Ruach Ha'Qodesh, or the Shekinah_)[^3]. These two, Logos and Spirit, having been subsumed into the Divine identity, the Divine _ousia_, could no longer be appropriately (or at least, correctly)[^4] construed as maintaining this traditional mediatorship, the one which made the Trinity idea plausible historically.

Of all those ancient theological ideas swept up in this radical separation of God and man, I find the notion of the "pre-Incarnate" Christ to be a most direct victim of the final deification of Logos, and the newly enriched import afforded to the Incarnation as the most consequential of God's modes of immanence. In the work of St. Justin Martyr, his subordinationist Logos Christology grounds all Old Testament theophanies, all therefore Christophanies, leaving Christ's intercessory role as both the Word of God and the human Messiah inextricably enmeshed. As the Logos' inherent immanence, albeit in its most primitive form, is interpreted away and even labeled outright heresy when appearing in the teachings of anyone canonized before the early 300s, Christ's humanity is increasingly clung to as God's "here-ness". To not dismiss Logos theologies like St. Justin's with callous disregard, one must now "flatten" Christ's humanity across time and space, a glorified humanity able to present itself before its creation in time. I am not Reformed, and see no need to interpret away the _possibility_ of such extra-spatial or extra-temporal feats by the risen Lord (John 20:19).  Nevertheless, any scheme which _necessitates_ a time-traveling man, or vaguer still, a requisite mechanism of Christ's "human energies" to explain any non-visionary, tangible, or even anthropomorphic presence of God, is very strange! 

It is a common, recurring understanding across all religions, that there is a sense in which God can be known to us, even outside the wonder of Christ's Incarnation, as God. Some, like Hart, go the extra mile and posit a monistic understanding, in the vein of Neo-Platonic emanationism. I am not expressly opposed to this, but I am skeptical. I pray that Hart is able to tread the lines between tapping into this intuition, and disregarding the primacy of Jesus in mediation with God, as Logos, as King, Prophet, and Priest, as Christ.

All I can say with certainty is that God Himself is an inexhaustible paradox, at once nearest and furthest, light and darkness, present and absent, inside and outside, part and whole. That then these be One, would be a mystery fitting of God most of all.

[^1]: Hart, _The Light of Tabor: Toward a Monistic Christology_. pg. 9

[^2]: Ibid. pg. 8

[^3]: Jacobs and Blau, "HOLY SPIRIT". https://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/7833-holy-spirit#anchor2

[^4]: I plan to publish my thoughts on the Eternal Son as the sole eikon of the Father, and its enduring doctrinal relevance in Eastern Orthodoxy, and its import for Christocentric theologies, in a future blog post.



