---
title: 23-Year-Old Dog Still Biohacks Its Focus The Old Fashioned Way (WIP)
description: ""
author: Jose A. Ramos
date: 2025-09-08
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog
draft: true
image: samoyed-coffee.jpg
---
Update on life events

Mention my migraine the day before.

Big topic: Caffeine and coffee. Miracle drug. Lay it out how I laid it out for Erick: how this is a _drug_. How it works for me. How its sactioned status is at once entirely unsurprising but also somewhat irresponsible given its effects, especially on individuals sensitive to it like myself.

Went to a conference in Upstate New York. Found myself enjoying the coffee hours like a normal person is expected to. This is what it feels to be "in the club". Indoctrination, I tell you!

Talk about my reviving interests:
- Writing
	- This blog
		- Its upkeep and redesign
		- Posting more...
	- Fiction
		- Setbacks:
			- Impostor Syndrome
				- Reading habits still lackluster
				- Do I lack imagination? Am I not cut out for this?
				- I need to learn so much... and I don't have community to vet my progress, to learn from...
			- Scope creep
				- Big ideas, connections between them, the expectation to have this sets up a huge barrier
			- Discomfort with the more "pantser" style of writing, for all my nonfiction I am a plotter at heart. As I write this little snippet, it's part of this bespoke tree-shaped bullet point list, and I use this structure everyday at my dayjob to organize my thinking, the day's events, TODOs, the divide-and-conquer steps and algorithmic thinking when programming... It's deeply ingrained in the way I think about things. Of course, to keep up the analogy with programming, I also do sometimes just, write something and test it out, improvising from there. But, I find that the feedback loop conferred by the immediately apparent "works" or "doesn't work" outcome in programming is not present in writing off-the-cuff. I have to be my own editor, my own judge. And that is a much harder thing to do, than some acceptance criteria in a kanban card or a failed compilation message. I'm grateful that, as I write this down, it dawns on me how much this stifles my confidence to write this way. But I think it is a necessary step to see results, and no less to brush up on vocabulary, grammar, everything in the art of _writing_, not _outlining_. 
				- Talk about my experience Pantsing once... how it was hard to come up with description good enough to make the scene vivid enough to drill down into, just "ticking the boxes" on what writing is "supposed" to be. I do write interesting snippets when inspired to do so, but that is hardly enough for a plot. However, I did somewhat discover _some_ elements of the story which I have persisted, transformed but ultimately grounded in that very exploration. This circumvents the vetting, even if the writing itself is shoddy and in need of rewriting. This is okay, though. Now, need I do that here too? That, my dear reader, would be a bit much for me at present. 
- Academic interests
	- Graph Theory
	- Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
	- Multi-agent Systems
	- Formal Verification
- Music Production
	- Brushing up on key terminology
	- Spun up Bitwig studio
	- Bought a nice MIDI pad, at a nice discount too!

Mention that awesome video I watched by that guy where he talked about how to best focus on multiple interests. Try to apply that...
