---
title: A Refutation of “heaven” and “hell” So Naively Conceived (Part 1)
description: A critique of the "particular judgement"
author: E. A. Ramos
date: 2026-02-13
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog
draft: true
---


I do find myself increasingly sympathetic to the doctrine of “soul sleep”, finding it to be unduly maligned. This is because I also believe that to buy into an intermediate state of reward or punishment, the so-called “particular judgement”, as anything but an evocative, analogical portrayal of a fundamentally atemporal and incorporeal reality concomitant with the Last Judgement itself, is to buy into the wildest superstitions. For one, the blessed are counted to be in “heaven”, and by that is meant some sort of “quasi-salvation”, where the dead are made to dwell in the abode of the Lord, yet NOT the New Jerusalem which is to be inaugurated by Him. Likewise, the dead are counted as being in “hell” (clarified by proponents to be hades if pressed enough), conceived as a fiery realm of torment, _distinct_ from the lake of fire in the Last Day. Very well, suppose this is so. These self-same people profess additionally, that these intermediate states are inherently bound in the same sense of time as we are. That is to say, the dead are entirely conscious, whether in this “heaven” or this “hell”, until the bodily resurrection, and experience a “waiting” in a true, literal sense. This is an internally incoherent position, as shown by the very proof-texts used to establish this doctrine.

# **Part 1: On “hell”**

For the realm of “hell”, adherents of the particular judgement so naively conceived quote St. Luke:

>
“There was a rich man who was dressed in purple and fine linen and lived in luxury every day. At his gate was laid a beggar named Lazarus, covered with sores and longing to eat what fell from the rich man’s table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores.
“The time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to Abraham’s bosom. The rich man also died and was buried. In Hades, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham far away, with Lazarus by his side. So he called to him, ‘Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this fire.’
“But Abraham replied, ‘Son, remember that in your lifetime you received your good things, while Lazarus received bad things, but now he is comforted here and you are in agony. And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been set in place, so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross over from there to us.’
“He answered, ‘Then I beg you, father, send Lazarus to my family, for I have five brothers. Let him warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torment.’
“Abraham replied, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them.’
“‘No, father Abraham,’ he said, ‘but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
“He said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”

Firstly, this is a parable. While odd amongst Jesus’ parables in that it references a proper name (Lazarus) and mentions hades explicitly as the setting, it also fulfills the standard pedagogical role of a parable. Notice how Abraham’s lesson, the point made through narrative, is one about belief in Christ’s teachings as the fulfillment of the Law and Prophets. The emphasis is never to establish the setting as a literal account of a literal place. Those who contend this is the case are at pains to explain how, though dead, the disembodied souls seemingly behave in corporeal ways. How do the souls converse, have tongues, have fingers? There is implicit in the presentation a degree of abstraction assumed, unless the reader accepts a crass _bodily bodylessness_, which is an absurdity. But notice, this is implicitly what the appeal to this text as proof of a conscious “particular judgement” does! The very corporeal experience of “time”, “torment”, and “consciousness” are smuggled out of the text, burying innumerable absurd consequences of this method in an arbitrary presumption of metaphor, where convenient.

Furthermore, this parable’s thematic connections to the story of St. Lazarus’s raising in St. John’s gospel further reinforces its status as parable. If this connection, noted by secular textual critics and theologians alike, is true, then according to St. John, Jesus was very truly correct. Lazarus did indeed rise from the dead, and the Jewish authorities did not believe in Him. On the contrary, they decided to kill Him! Yet, it is obvious that the Lazarus in the parable seems, on the surface, to be a different person entirely from St. Lazarus. St. Lazarus and his sisters are relatively wealthy, having enough means to aid and supply our Lord during His ministry. The Lazarus in the parable is instead a starving, sick beggar. This discrepancy, and the aforementioned unique traits of the parable, are enough for some to speculate, under the presumption that the parable is literal, that therefore this Lazarus is an entirely different person. However, St. John repeatedly shows awareness of the other gospels, and I argue it is more likely that he shows the fulfillment of this parable’s lesson, in one of our Lord’s most marvelous signs. St. Lazarus, although financially well off, recognized Christ’s message and accepted his status as a sinner in need of salvation. He accepted his being “poor in spirit”, as opposed to the assuredness of righteousness in the Jewish authorities. It would therefore make sense that the parable of the rich man and Lazarus be allegorical, if indeed it is meant to point to both the literal raising of St. Lazarus on the one hand, and the unified message the two passages convey on the other.

Additionally, the parable’s characterization of hades is seemingly unique in all of Scripture, if taken at face value, and not incorporated into the broader motifs of the Bible. The parable clearly distinguishes from “Abraham’s bosom” and “the place of torment”, but it is not clear whether both are supposed to be in hades, or if hades is supposed to be only the latter. Clearly, both Lazarus and the rich man are dead. Thus, if hades is characterized as the “abode of the dead”, then surely the chasm in the parable is within hades itself. But, this simple reading goes against the witness of Scripture, where hades is unequivocally characterized as that which Christ has overcome. The realm of the dead (_sheol_ in Hebrew) is always used as a synonym or poetic symbol for death in the Old Testament. Further, the realm of the dead is personified under the names of abaddon and sheol (Psalm 88:11), translated as “destruction” and “the pit” respectively. The book of Job in particular emphasizes God’s dominion over them (Job 26:6), associated with His creative power. In the New Testament, death and hades are  likewise associated as the fourth horseman and his partner in the Apocalypse of St. John (Revelation 6:8, 20:14). Further, both are identified as that which our Lord has conquered by His Passion and Resurrection (Revelation 1:18). The epistle to the Hebrews likewise associates death to the devil (Hebrews 2:14), whose power Christ has freed the children of God from (Hebrews 2:15). Death and hades, if not synonyms, are conceived as strongly associated powers which shackle humanity, under the dominion of satan, but now trampled under Christ’s foot (Genesis 3:15).

Thus, it is contrary to the spirit of the word of God to imply that “Abraham’s bosom” is some sort of “natural” compartment within hades itself, reserved for the “naturally righteous” as a sort of cosmological invariant underlying the mechanism of death. Christ, in His death, preached to the spirit in hades (1 Peter 3:19), and liberated the righteous dead in the Harrowing. He holds the keys of death and hades (Revelation 1:18), and it is presumably by this power that He has accomplished this. There is in this sense a “gate” within hades itself, which only our Lord can open. It is by following Him through that we are liberated from death, from hades. Whether this is a cosmological reality, or a metaphor for following Christ, is somewhat irrelevant, as it can be both (and in preaching to the prisoners, both layers are indeed true even _within_ _the ‘myth’ itself_). To the extent we are allowing the possibility of some real existence of hades as the “abode of the dead”, this is what a harmonized reading of Scripture leads to.

Thus, we establish that if “Abraham’s bosom” is “within hades” in any conceivable sense, it must be in this sense of a periphery, or besides an exit, or in the exit itself, or in the act of exiting itself, further identified with Christ’s word, works, and person. It is in this sense that at once a “great chasm” can exist between hades in the first place: that between hades proper and the liberation thereof in Christ, from within. And notice that, in this scheme, Abraham’s bosom _is_ Life, _is_ the Resurrection. Hence why Christ says that He is the Life and Resurrection of the dead (John 11:25). Thus, we end up at the idea that Abraham’s bosom and hades are ultimately distinct, regardless. The chasm is imposed by Christ Himself.

This reading, charged by the overwhelming motifs of Scripture, is nevertheless at tension with the understanding of the resurrection of the dead as merely the material pre-requisite for the Last Judgement. There is a conflict here, between Resurrection as salvation, and Resurrection as judgement. This is noteworthy, since the two concepts are intimately related. To address this quandary, we direct our attention to the fact that our exegesis of hades does not account for the parable’s unique characterization of it as a place of torment. In contrast to the exact status of Abraham’s bosom, this fact is indisputable. This is a revelation from the lips of our Lord, which although not in principle contradicting the overwhelming Biblical characterization of sheol, does require further analysis. 

In most of Scripture, sheol is noted as a dark, gloomy place, its inhabitants called “shades” (Job 26:5). In the book of Psalms, it is written that worshipping or knowing God is seemingly impossible (Psalm 88:10-12). This is precisely why Christ, the Resurrection and Liberator of hades, is the fulfillment of this Psalm: He flips the pessimistic, questioning laments of the Psalmist, answering them in the negative by unveiling the limitless reach of God’s love. Even in the realm of death, God will reach out to those therein, revealing His love and raising men into Life. 

Therefore, it is nigh-inevitable to see in any sort of torment in hades a rejection of Christ, even in the realm of the dead. Or, alternatively, a rejection _by_ Christ. We thus have the same question of soteriology that burns up theologians in the here and now: In the Final Judgement, do we reject God, or does God reject us? There is a sense in which both are co-extensive. Kicking the question down to a hypothetical “particular judgement” in hades does nothing to answer the question, it only obscures this central tension, as it is nevertheless present there too. In the Apocalypse, we see in St. John’s vision how death, hades, the resurrection of the dead, and the lake of fire are all related:

> 
Then I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. The earth and the heavens fled from his presence, and there was no place for them. And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. The sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each person was judged according to what they had done. Then death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. The lake of fire is the second death. Anyone whose name was not found written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire.

Here it is: the Final Judgement as the ultimate consummation of Justice; and the Final Judgement as the separation of the sheep and the goats, the inheritors of Life and the twice dead. Notice, a distinction between the “dead” and the “twice dead”. The “dead” are liberated from death, hades, and the sea (a symbol of chaos, a similar entity to leviathan, the dragon, and satan himself). Then, each person is “judged according to what they had done” (Revelation 20:13). It it in this sense that the resurrection of the dead occurs. Finally, death and hades undergo the “second death”. This second death, mediated by the lake of fire, far surpasses the concept of “death” as we understand it, but it is meaningfully analogous. Death therefore truly _dies_. And similarly, those not found in the Book of Life, truly _die_ as well. The lake of fire, gehenna itself, is also described as a place of torment for satan, the beast, and the false prophet. We keep in mind that this book is highly allegorical. But we can glean from this passage the equating of torment in the lake of fire, the death of death, and death of the twice dead. Steering clear of the issue of infernalism for now (another topic for another day), the evocative imagery points to the idea that fiery torment is co-extensive with death and hades, particularly those who remain so dead and so therein, as it is the ultimate fate of all three to _die_ _the second death_. We thus get an idea for why hades, in our Lord’s parable, is characterized so. For, although the twice dead _leave_ Hades, they never truly escaped “death”, the true death in the lake of fire. They were thus “resurrected”, but do not inherit “The Resurrection”. We recall in the gospels that a lake of fire is just one of the images invoked for gehenna, another being the _outer darkness_ (Matthew 8:11):

> I tell you, many will come from east and west and sit at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, 12 while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness; there men will weep and gnash their teeth.”

What is this image of the Kingdom of God but the reality pointed to by the bosom of Abraham? And what is that outer darkness but that lake of fire, that fire of hades, that darkness of the pit? These are realities not entirely physical, which thus welcome these different analogies and free associations. But that is precisely my thesis.
