---
author: Jose A. Ramos
title: Qualified Success in Tapping the Wellspring of Volition
date: 2024-12-03
description: 
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - blog
  - personal
  - update
  - religion
draft: true
---

I did not expect this to be the first blog post of 2025, but here we are. No platitudes about the new year come to mind, any such inclination to filler must've been extinguished about a day or so into January. Nevertheless, this _is_ a standard, boring life update. _Yay._

The big struggle conveyed in my last few posts has been one of _missing drive_. Drive to read and write, mostly, but also to pursue any kind of academic pursuit. To that end, I have been exploring my options for higher education. I have compiled a (very unredacted) list of degrees in interesting subjects, mostly through the lens of research but some more career-oriented. I've grouped together some that would serve similar ends.

- MA/MS in Computer Science
- MA/MS in Statistics / Data Science
- MDiv with concentration in liturgics, patristics, or systematic theology
- JD with research opportunities in computational law
- PhD in Sociology
- PhD in Political Science

Some of these reflect pet interests of mine accrued within the past few months, but some of these reflect long-held obsessions. Some are obvious picks, others represent a sort of synthesis of all that fulfills me. I wish to expand on each:

# Computer Science

This is probably the most uninteresting one. I can complete one at Columbia University in a year given the vast amount of grad-level transfer credits I'd have at my disposal. It's not very exciting, it's just a no-brainer. The cost is prohibitive at my current salary, though. 

# Statistics / Data Science

# Divinity

# Law

# Sociology

# Political Science



On the reading and writing: a little progress, I suppose?

